











                           POS Version F.15
                              Amendment 3
                             Release Notes





                             S. Boondoggle












    This document contains notes and late-breaking news related to
    version F.15 of the PERQ Operating System.









    Copyright (C) 2013-2026
    Boondoggle Heavy Industries, Ltd.
    1060 West Addison
    Chicago, IL 60613
    (800) 555-1212


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26













     This  document  is  not  to  be  reproduced  in  any form or
     transmitted in whole or in part, without the  prior  written
     authorization of Boondoggle Heavy Industries, Ltd.

     The  information  in  this  document  is  subject  to change
     without notice and should not be construed as  a  commitment
     by  Boondoggle  Heavy Industries, Ltd.  The Company  assumes
     no responsibility for any errors that  may  appear  in  this
     document.

     Boondoggle Heavy Industries, Ltd. will  make every effort to
     keep customers apprised  of  all  documentation  changes  as
     quickly as possible.  The Reader's Comments card is distrib-
     uted with this document to request  users'  critical  evalu-
     ation to assist us in preparing future documentation.





     PERQ was a trademark of Three Rivers Computer Corporation.

     Boondoggle Heavy Industries, Ltd. is one tiny subsidiary of
     the burgeoning Boondoggle family of companies, which exists
     solely in my head.  For now.  Be afraid.




















                                - ii -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



Table of Contents


1.  Preface                                                            1
1.1.  Intended Audience                                                1
1.2.  PERQemu                                                          1
1.3.  Additional Resources                                             1

2.  System Hardware Requirements                                       2
2.1.  Emulated Hardware Support                                        2

3.  Introduction                                                       3
3.1.  Project History and Goals                                        3
3.2.   Contents                                                        4
3.2.1.  Changes for Amendment 1                                        4
3.2.2.  Changes for Amendment 2                                        4
3.2.3.  Changes for Amendment 3                                        5
3.3.    Getting Started                                                5
3.3.1.  Logging On                                                     6
3.3.2.  Online Help                                                    6
3.3.3.  Logging Off                                                    7

4.  Release Notes                                                      7
4.1.  New Features                                                     7
4.1.1.  Default Directory Structure                                    7
4.1.2.  Source Code Cleanup                                            9
4.1.3.  Microcode Updates                                              9
4.1.4.  Interpreter Placement Changes                                 10
4.1.5.  Pascal Compiler Update                                        10
4.1.6.  Pascal Development Tools                                      11
4.1.7.  Pascal Library Changes                                        11
4.1.8.  Incompatible Library Changes                                  12
4.1.9.  Expanded SearchList                                           12
4.1.10.  FontEd and CursDesign                                        12
4.1.11.  Utility Updates                                              13
4.1.11.1.  MAKEDIR                                                    13
4.1.11.2.  SETSEARCH                                                  13
4.1.11.3.  DETAILS                                                    13
4.1.11.4.  PERQ.FILES                                                 13
4.1.11.5.  FTP                                                        13
4.1.11.6.  Kermit                                                     13
4.1.12.  Utility Pathname Changes                                     14

5.0.  Release History and Roadmap                                     14
5.1.  Release F.16                                                    14
5.2.  Release F.18                                                    14
5.3.  Release F.22                                                    14
5.4.  Release F.35                                                    14







                               - iii -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26


1.  Preface


Release F.15 of the PERQ Operating System (POS) is an  upward-compatible
version of POS F.1,  released by the long-defunct  Three Rivers Computer
Corporation in  late 1982.   As the  first new POS release  in nearly 30
years, this version is unique in that it was developed and tested almost
entirely on an emulated PERQ.   In 2022, POS F.15 was verified on a real
PERQ-1!  Amendment 1 addresses a minor patch to correct a spurious error
message.  A roadmap for future POS F releases is included as an appendix.


1.1.  Intended Audience


This document describes  changes to and potential incompatibilities with
previous POS versions as well as the  numerous improvements incorporated
into F.15.  It is assumed  that the reader has some familiarity with POS
and the operation of the PERQ hardware,  or has some experience with the
basic operation of PERQemu,  the software emulator.  For new users,  POS
documentation  is included  with the full installation,  or is available
on the web (see Additional Resources, below).



1.2.  PERQemu


PERQemu is a freely available, software-only PERQ emulator written in C#
for Microsoft Windows and the .NET Framework.  It also runs on Linux and
Mac OS X,  under the Mono compatibility environment.   As there are very
few surviving PERQ computers left in the world,  the emulator provides a
fully-compatible,  near-cycle-accurate development environment for those
interested in exploring and preserving the software, lore and history of
this unique and significant computing platform.

PERQemu is available for download from github.com/skeezicsb/PERQemu.



1.3.  Additional Resources


This is the first POS release since the creation of the  World Wide Web.
Additional resources such as documentation  and software updates,  user-
contributed software, downloads of future releases and  up-to-the-minute
news will be available online at <TBD>.

A large, growing and very useful archive of PERQ documentation and soft-
ware is available through the Bitsavers Archive, at www.bitsavers.org.

The current PERQemu and  POS F.15 release maintainer  can be reached via
email at "skeezicsb @ gmail.com".



                                - 1 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



2.  System Hardware Requirements


POS F.15 supports the following PERQ hardware:

    *   CPU:  PERQ-1 (4K) or -1A (16K);

    *   MEM:  512KB, 1MB or 2MB Memory board;

        o   Portrait display (768 x 1024);

    *   IOB:  Standard IO Board (Z80 version 8.x);

        o   12- or 24MB Shugart hard disk drive;

        o   1MB Shugart floppy disk drive;

        o   PERQ-1 keyboard;

        o   Kriz tablet and BitPad One GPIB pointing devices;

        o   RS-232 serial port;

    *   OIO:  Drivers and software for Option IO board devices:

        o   Canon laser printer (LBP-10 and LBP-CX);

        o   STUT utility for the Archive Sidewinder QIC streaming
            tape drive;

        o   10Mhz Ethernet.

    *   Most devices and peripherals compatible with POS F.1.


INCLUDED, but NOT TESTED in this release:

    *   OIO:  Drivers and diagnostics for Option IO boards:

        o   PERQ Link.



2.1.  Emulated Hardware Support


POS F.15 runs under PERQemu v0.4.0 and later in  limited  configurations.
Newer versions of the emulator  add support for  the Option IO Board  and
are far more robust and feature complete.   It is highly recommended that
you install the latest Release version for maximum utility (version 0.9.5
as of this release).




                                - 2 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



3.  Introduction


3.1.  Project History and Goals


POS Version F.15 is the  culmination of a  peculiar set of decisions and
circumstances.   Ultimately, however, it came down to a desire to  honor
the  people who created the PERQ  by gathering up as much  of the source
code as I could find, to present it to a new generation.

In sum  there are nearly 215,000 lines  of Pascal, microcode and commen-
tary here,  bundled into  a new code branch  that I plan to  continue to
develop  over time.   A roadmap  for future POS F releases  is presented
later in this document.

Some of the factors that contributed to this release include:

    *   The desire to upgrade my PERQ from F.0,  in order to install
        important  Ethernet fixes  in an attempt to  archive my hard
        disk over the network (rather than RS-232);

    *   My POS F.1 floppy media  was on loan and unavailable,  and I
        did not (at the time) have access to the POS G source code;

    *   Two of my working PERQs, and PERQemu, support only the older
        Z80 protocol, so staying with the POS F branch made sense;

    *   A renewed interest in  microcoding led to the development of
        a replacement for the original  line drawing microcode,  and
        the incorporation of newer RasterOp microcode as well;

    *   A desire to rediscover and preserve the highly arcane art of
        building a new POS from the ground up, something that nobody
        else on Earth possibly cares about anymore -- purely for the
        hack value -- and "because it was there!"

For these somewhat silly reasons and more I embarked upon a line-by-line
code review and stylistic  clean up,  partly aided by  some Perl scripts,
and ended up spending nearly  two years in my off hours  developing F.15,
using it to test and debug the missing features of the 16K CPU emulation
in PERQemu, such as the Multiply/Divide unit and the RasterOp pipeline.

Mostly, though, I wanted to make it  beautiful.  The PERQ  was my "first
love" in computing, and over the decades remained a passion -- much more
than just a hobby.   I dedicate the efforts here  to the people at Three
Rivers Computer Corporation, who designed and built "a landmark computer
system."  They inspired me to learn to program and embark upon a 25-year
career in programming and  systems administration.   Having  retired now
(from that deeply unhealthy industry),  I do this  purely for the joy of
it -- keeping the old PERQs alive has made computing fun again.




                                - 3 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



3.2.   Contents


POS F.15 is being released  for use with PERQemu  in the form of virtual
Shugart 24MB hard disk images.  These are pre-loaded and ready-to-run in
two configurations:

    *   f15.prqm    - Basic binary-only release, with a selection of
                      demos and applications to try, but without all
                      of the development tools and source code;

    *   f15dev.prqm - Full release including source code, Pascal and
                      microcode development tools,  user-contributed
                      games,  fonts and applications, documentation,
                      and two sets of demos.

The first release of POS F.15 was packaged in an older ".phd" (PERQ Hard
Disk) format;  the amended releases and disk images bundled with PERQemu
use the newer ".prqm" (PERQmedia archive) format.   Both image types can
be read by the PERQdisk utility, which may be used to extract the disk's
contents into  files in the host filesystem.

In addition, a ZIP or Unix tar/gzip archive containing the  complete set
of  DSSD floppy diskette images  is provided.  POS F.15  is self-hosting
and may be installed from floppy images onto a new, blank Shugart image.
This is mostly automated, but not yet documented.  Caveat Perqor.

The original F.15 release floppies are saved in ".pfd" (PERQ Floppy Disk)
format, which is essentially a "raw" floppy image with an embedded magic
"cookie" containing  limited metadata.  The  amended releases  were also
converted  to ".prqm" format,  as well as  the ".IMD" (ImageDisk utility)
format.  PERQemu, and the PERQdisk utility, can read and transcribe both.
PERQdisk can be downloaded from https://github.com/skeezicsb/PERQdisk.


3.2.1   Changes for Amendment 1


POS F.15 Amendment 1  is distributed in the new "PERQMedia" format, with
hard disk  and floppy  image files  using the  ".prqm"  extension.  This
replaces both the ".phd"  and ".pfd" types mentioned above.  These files
are directly supported by PERQemu v0.4.6  and beyond, and can be read by
the PERQdisk  utility.  They  can be easily transcoded  by PERQdisk into
the older formats if you still run the older PERQemu v0.4.4.


3.2.2   Changes for Amendment 2


POS F.15 Amendment 2 adds software support for the Canon LBP-10 and LBP-
CX laser printers.  This is  a limited port of the  CPrint package  that
was used in POS G and Accent, with the Screen Image Dump ("SID") library



                                - 4 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



that replaced the "CSDX" driver in POS F.   Three Rivers' "Print Server"
package bundled additional services (FTP, remote printing, network time,
etc.) but this initial port  contains just the standalone Canon drivers.
(The full Print Server functionality should be available in POS F.16, to
be released Real Soon Now.)

The  OS.UTILS.CANON.SOURCE (680335-00) and .BINARY (680135-00)  floppies
contain the new software.  Due to a naming conflict the older SCREENDUMP
utility has been changed to HP1310A, with updates to the OS.UTILS.SOURCE
and .BINARY floppies accordingly.  The PERQ emulator does  not currently
support printing to simulated GPIB printers, but if you happen to have a
real HP1310A connected to your real PERQ (congratulations!)  you'll need
to rename sys:boot>bin>ScreenDump.Seg and relink it to continue printing
on your HP printer before installing the Canon driver.  As this is over-
whelmingly  unlikely,  no command file  is provided.   PERQemu v0.5.5 or
later is required to use the Canon printing software.


3.2.3   Changes for Amendment 3


Amendment 3 incorporates  the late additions to Amendment 2 (Canon laser
printing software, the STUT streaming tape utility), as well as a number
of  bug fixes to the bundled utilities.   Additionally, a QIC tape image
and a new  installation floppy is included, which allows  POS F.15 to be
loaded without the  crazy  amount of floppy shuffling;  instructions for
partitioning the Shugart hard disk for a limited (binary only) or a full
developer (sources and build tools) installation are provided if you are
so inclined to attempt a "bare metal" install yourself.


3.3.    Getting Started


Unpack the  F.15 disk images into your  PERQemu `Disks' folder.   Floppy
images are typically placed in  a separate  `Floppies' folder,  but this
is not required  (they can reside  in the `Disks' folder  with the  hard
disk images).  Future enhancements to PERQemu will assist in organizing
and locating media files.

Launch PERQemu in the manner appropriate for your platform (double-click
the program icon on Windows;  invoke "mono" from  the Unix command line),
then use the "load harddisk" command to read in the disk image.  The POS
default boot letter "a" is preconfigured,  so simply type  "go" to start
the emulator.

Floppy images are loaded with the  "load floppy" command  in the PERQemu
console window.  The  file  "labels.txt"  contains descriptions  of each
floppy image included in the archive.   The "load boot" floppy  contains
the programs  and command files  needed to bootstrap  a new hard disk or
upgrade  an existing one.  The "fix boot" floppy  contains programs that
can be used to repair a corrupted or broken disk or partition.



                                - 5 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



Amendment 3 reorganizes the filesystem floppies to accommodate streaming
tape installations, as well as traditional floppy loads.  Note that STUT
operates at the partition level,  not file-by-file.  This makes the tape
method very handy for loading lots of data at once.  To selectively load
the sources for a particular program, however,  the floppy media is much
more flexible (pardon the pun!).  PERQemu v0.5.8 or later is required to
use the streaming tape drive.

As is  standard procedure on the PERQ,  a capital boot letter is used to
boot from floppy.  In PERQemu, load a  bootable floppy image,  then type 
the command  "bootchar A" (case is significant).  Type "go" to start the
emulator.  As with the hardware,  a floppy boot  will  take a bit longer
than a normal hard disk boot.  After the usual VFY display, the DDS will
seem to hang at 151  for quite some time;  depending on the speed of the
host computer, several minutes may be required. Once booted, POS running
from floppy  behaves just  as it does  from the  hard disk,  albeit with
fewer programs available and some restrictions (no pop-up menus).


3.3.1.  Logging On


When booting from floppy, `guest' is the only user name  accepted by the
Login program.   When prompted  for a  user name,  you may  simply press
<RETURN>  for the default.   There is generally  very little  free space
available on the boot floppies  and it recommended that  they be treated
as if they are "read only."

For the  F.15 hard disk  images, `guest' is  the only  user provided  by
default, but you may add your own accounts with the UserControl program.
In POS, user home directories may be placed in any partition,  though by
convention the `sys:user>' partition  is typically used for  user files.
The default home directory path for POS F.15 is `sys:user>guest>'.


3.3.2.  Online Help


The F.15 hard disk image is pre-loaded with all of the available POS F.1
documentation  and help files.  To access  help from  the shell,  simply
type `HELP' or press the HELP key on the keyboard  (F5 in PERQemu).  The
interactive  HELPER program  is self-explanatory.  Most of  the standard
POS utility programs also accept the `/HELP' command-line switch.

Other preformatted documentation is available in sys:boot>docs>.  On the
developer  disk image, programming  documentation  is in  sys:dev>docs>.
These are the POS F.1 documents,  provided for reference.  The  TYPEFILE
program is used to view files on the screen, one page at a time.

When the source files for these documents have been found (or recreated) 
and the 3PROSE (formatting program) source is made available, the online
docs will be updated.  This is slated for inclusion in the F.16 release;
see the roadmap for more information.


                                - 6 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



3.3.3.  Logging Off


The hard disk images  include the BYE utility,  which is used to log out
of POS and (optionally) power off the machine.  While it is not strictly
necessary to log out,  it is encouraged  as BYE will perform some house-
keeping functions when run.

Note that if you use the ``/OFF'' switch with PERQemu, the emulator will
give you a chance to  save the hard disk image  (if you want to preserve
changes made during the session) before exiting the program.  Or you may
type "reset"  to reboot the virtual PERQ.  See the PERQemu documentation
for more information.



4.  Release Notes


4.1.  New Features


POS F.15 is built from the POS F.1 source code,  with a few enhancements
and changes.  Future releases will expand upon some of these changes.


4.1.1.  Default Directory Structure


POS is generally contained in one partition, with very little structure;
essentially the entire release gets dumped into sys:boot>.  In F.15 I've
introduced a somewhat Unix-like structure to help organize things a bit.

In the default installation, the root partition is still sys:boot>.  The
rest of the OS is now separated into several subdirectories:

    sys:boot>bin>       Contains the .SEG and .RUN files for the
                        system and utility programs.  Stores the
                        .BIN and  .BOOT/.MBOOT files  (microcode
                        binaries) as well.

    sys:boot>lib>       Contains the .SEG and .PAS files  (stubs
                        only) that  make up the  standard Pascal
                        Module Library.  The .SEG files  are re-
                        quired;  if you  are not  doing software
                        development, the .PAS files are not.

    sys:boot>fonts>     Fonts for POS  are stored in .KST files;
                        these are  collected in one place.   The
                        FontEd  utility  is provided  by default
                        in F.15  (was part of the "User Library"
                        from 3RCC).



                                - 7 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



    sys:boot>etc>       Miscellaneous supporting files including
                        the default  System.15.Config  file used
                        by Makeboot, various cursors used by the
                        Shell and utilities, the Default.Profile
                        and System.Users files used by Login and
                        UserControl,  and  other  "housekeeping"
                        files.  Command files for creating boot-
                        able floppies are here too.

    sys:boot>docs>      Formatted documentation.  In the initial
                        release,  these .DOC files are from F.1.

    sys:boot>tmp>       Temporary files,  such as the swap files
                        used by the Pepper text editor, are kept
                        here.

User files are, by convention, kept in a separate `sys:user>' partition.
In POS F.15, the default "guest" user is the only user account provided;
others may be  created using the  UserControl utility.

    sys:user>guest>     Default user home directory.


For a full POS source installation, a large :dev> partition is required,
as the source code requires quite a bit of disk space:

    sys:dev>bin>        Binary files for the supplemental Pascal
                        utilities.  These include PMake, PasMac,
                        and Booster, all of which are experimen-
                        tal or  user-contributed and  were never
                        part of the official POS releases.

    sys:dev>src>        Source code  for F.15.  Includes  Pascal
                        and microcode source for everything inc-
                        luded in the release.

    sys:dev>docs>       Reference documentation for the standard
                        Pascal library, compiler, and all of the
                        development tools.

Finally, demos, games and other contributed software is kept by default
in the :extra> partition.  This is where the fun stuff lives:

    sys:extra>games>    A number of entertaining and challenging
                        games are installed here.

    sys:extra>contrib>  User-contributed software source.  Init-
                        ially includes Kermit  (a popular serial
                        communications and file transfer program)
                        and Pepper,  an EMACS-like editor.  (The
                        binaries for these are usually installed
                        in sys:boot>bin>.)



                                - 8 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



    sys:extra>stddemo>  The "standard" POS demo programs.  These
                        are standalone programs that demonstrate
                        the graphics capabilities of the PERQ.

    sys:extra>sigdemo>  The amazing self-running booth demo from
                        SIGGRAPH '82.  See the file DEMO.DOC for
                        information on starting the demo.


4.1.2.  Source Code Cleanup


All of  the source code  included in  POS F.15 has been  reformatted and
cleaned up to use a set of consistent coding standards, to enhance read-
ability and ease efforts  to improve and expand  the code base in future
releases.  Due to the  wide differences in  personal coding styles  used
by the  original programmers,  some of the  source files  were extremely
difficult to parse;  some automated Perl scripts and scrupulous line-by-
line review  by the release maintainer  represent a good first effort at
making the POS source base more maintainable.

POS ships with an extensive Pascal Library.  For the most part the  F.15
API remains compatible with F.1 from which it was derived; however, some
breaking changes have been made that are documented below.  The included  
library documentation in sys:dev>docs>PasLib.Doc is out-of-date, however.
This will be remedied as soon as the sources and tools used to reformat
and reconstruct that document are available.

Microcode sources  were similarly  updated,  with  the exception  of two
microprograms that are not high on the priority list:

    *   Boot.Micro is the program burned into the PERQ Boot PROM
        (read from the PROM folder in PERQemu);

    *   Krnl.Micro is used by ODTPrq to assist in debugging mic-
        rocode, using  two PERQs  connected by  PERQlink cables.
        There is currently  no emulation of the link board func-
        tionality in PERQemu.

These files will be cleaned up as time permits, but are included in F.15
for historical interest.  The code is provided as-is.


4.1.3.  Microcode Updates


POS F.15 incorporates two changes to the standard Q-machine interperter,
PERQ.Micro:

    *   RasterOp (RO.Micro) was updated to the  latest available
        version to correct a few memory timing issues, and a re-
        working  of the  register allocation  and initialization
        routine freed up a register and some instruction slots;


                                - 9 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



    *   Line.Micro was replaced by new module (Draw.Micro) which
        provides  routines to  draw points,  lines,  and circles
        (filled or unfilled).

In this initial release the new Draw features are not "public"; DrawLine
is invoked through the standard LINE Q-code, called by the standard Line
procedure in module Screen.

The new  DrawLine function  is slightly faster  than the old  routine in
most situations,  but is optimized for  faster horizontal lines -- which
allows for drawing  filled circles very quickly.  In the next release, a
new Pascal  Library module  will provide  a public API for accessing the
drawing functions,  and may evolve  toward providing  a "QuickDraw-like"
set of graphics primitives for POS.  (See the roadmap, below.)


4.1.4.  Interpreter Placement Changes


The standard PERQ.Micro and IO.Micro placement has been changed and some
small first efforts made to clean up the .Dfs files (used to share entry
points with Pascal modules).  The undocumented "DrawByte" routine,  used
by the Editor, TypeFile  and user-contributed Rasteroids game remains at
address #4010(octal).  This will change in a future release, as DrawByte
will be moved  into Draw.Micro  and made accessible  through a supported
Pascal Library module.

                             ** WARNING **

      If your program uses  hard-coded entry points,  called using
      InLineByte(JCS) or the JumpControlStore() procedure, it will
      almost certainly require an update to work with F.15.

The standard  Qcode interpreter  and IO microcode  for F.15 does not use
the  upper banks  in the  16K CPU, so the  same version of  PERQ.Bin and
IO.Bin will boot on any CPU.  This may change in a future release.


4.1.5.  Pascal Compiler Update


The PERQ Pascal Compiler has been updated to version 9.15.  This version
is a fairly major step up from the V7.0 compiler included in earlier POS
F releases.   It includes a number of bug fixes,  as well as support for
longer identifiers  (14 characters).   Note that this  may necessitate a
careful  review  of your  source code  for inadvertent bugs;  all of the
Pascal sources included in the release have been updated to build clean-
ly with the new compiler.

Pascal V9.15 as provided can be built using the older V7.0 compiler, and
can build itself using a two-phase build process.  The Q-code version is
unchanged from POS F.0/F.1  (Q-code V3).   The QDis disassembler is also
included.


                                - 10 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



4.1.6.  Pascal Development Tools


An optional  supplemental package of  Pascal development tools  is avail-
able.   Although these tools  have undergone a first pass  at the source
code cleanup and documentation effort as the rest of the release,  these
tools were not generally released by 3RCC, and as such they may have dif-
ferent command-line parsing  or option handling.  They have not yet been
extensively tested under F.15.
The packages are:

    *   PMake, a  "poor man's Make"  utility.  Aids in  the com-
        pilation of large or complex programs;

    *   PasMac,  a macro preprocessor  for Pascal.   Used exten-
        sively in the Accent environment,  this wasn't generally
        available for POS F;

    *   Booster, a Q-code optimizer.  Can rewrite  .SEG files to
        improve execution speed  of compiled programs.   Has not
        been extensively tested, and should be considered highly
        experimental.

These utilities are installed in sys:dev>bin> by default.


4.1.7.  Pascal Library Changes


Several small changes  to the standard  Pascal Library are introduced in
F.15.  These  may require recompilation or relinking  of programs ported
from other POS versions.

Changes include:

    Module Lights:
        Changed the geometry to optimize RasterOp efficiency and
        slightly  reduce overhead.   Plus, I like  blinky lights,
        so I enabled the light for disk access.

    Module PERQ_String:
        Included the Concat3 function (from Sail_String?), which
        is a somewhat common case in many programs.

    Module XScreen:
        Incorporated into the  standard library.   Contains some
        enhanced screen and font handling calls that are used by
        several of the extra packages  (demos, the Font / Cursor
        Editors, etc.) and may be extended in future releases to
        supplement the standard Screen module. Subject to change.





                                - 11 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



    Module CmdParse/PopCmdParse:
        Return codes revamped and ErrorType changed from a plain
        integer  (rather than an enumerated type).   The routine
        CnvUpper, which  was marked  as "deprecated"  in POS F.0,
        finally removed.  Use ConvUpper in PERQ_String instead.


4.1.8.  Incompatible Library Changes


The return codes for the CmdParse/PopCmdParse module have changed.  This
was not considered lightly, as it will almost certainly break older pro-
grams.  However,  the previous convention was  basically ridiculous; the
error returned  was based on  the length of the  arguments array,  which
changed from one program to the next.

The error type was also changed to an integer, rather than an enumerated
type,  so that the  return value may (if valid)  be used directly as the
CmdArray index.   As integers in  PERQ Pascal are signed,  error returns
from CmdParse are now  negative numbers (enumerated  as integer contants
instead).  Thus the test for any return value from the CmdParse routines
that used to be "numCmds + n"  is now simplified, and the "MaxCmds" con-
stant may be increased.


4.1.9.  Expanded SearchList


The standard filesystem searchlist array has been expanded to 7 entries,
two of which are reserved.   The system SetSearch utility  has also been
greatly simplified, with all of the warnings and confusion about popping
the last entry or pushing too many entries removed.

The new behavior  is that the 1st entry is always the current directory,
and an array slot is always  reserved for that purpose.   The last entry
(also reserved) is the default path to the bin> directory on the current
boot device and partition. The five intervening slots are free for users
to use without restriction.

This makes it much harder  to remove the path  containing Shell.Run from
your searchlist,  which is a silly thing to do anyway.  New constants in
module FileSystem define the new/modified search list parameters.


4.1.10.  FontEd and CursDesign


The POS font and  cursor editors,  FontEd and CursDesign,  were provided
to users on an ad hoc basis through TRUST (Three Rivers Users SocieTy?).
In POS F.15 they've been  cleaned up and  integrated into the release as
part of the OS.EDITORS group.   CursDesign also includes an experimental
(buggy) rotate command that allows rotating bitmaps through 360 degrees.



                                - 12 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



4.1.11.  Utility Updates


4.1.11.1.  MAKEDIR


The MakeDir command  now includes a `/QUIET' switch,  useful for command
files.  If the path given to MakeDir already exists (and is a directory)
the utility exits quietly rather than complaining or trying to overwrite
the directory.


4.1.11.2.  SETSEARCH


The SetSearch utility  now manipulates the extended system searchlist as
described above.


4.1.11.3.  DETAILS


The Details utility  prints the  extended searchlist.  If  "pointing" is
allowed, Details will now display which device  (Kriz Tablet or the GPIB
BitPad)  is active.  Pointing device  maybe selected  through the user's
login profile, or by the "/TABLETTYPE" switch to the Login program.


4.1.11.4.  PERQ.FILES


The PERQ.Files utility is out-of-date with the F.15 release, and its use
is deprecated.  Any command files produced are likely to be inconsistent
with the media images provided for F.15,  and PERQ.Files  will no longer
be updated or maintained in future releases.


4.1.11.5.  FTP


A bug  related to the updated command parsing that broke the FTP program
has been repaired.  FTP can be used  to transfer files between two hosts
over Ethernet or RS-232;  both interfaces have been tested  to work with
PERQemu v0.9.5.  (The protocol is very fragile, however.)


4.1.11.6.  Kermit


The user-contributed  port of Kermit  was updated to correct  a bug that
prevented  files from being  successfully saved  on any  partition other
than :boot, due to a temporary file naming problem.



                                - 13 -


POS Version F.15 Release Notes                             30 May 26



4.1.12.  Utility Pathname Changes


Utilities that access supplemental files (such as cursors, error message
text, or other databases)  were updated to use the new default pathnames
and directory structure.


5.0.  Release History and Roadmap


The unreleased, retroactively-named POS F.14  was simply a collection of
development efforts and experiments  designed to rediscover  and relearn
the steps  needed to bootstrap a PERQ OS entirely from scratch.  I chose
F.15 as a play on "half way between F.1 and F.2" (i.e. POS F1.5).  Since
3RCC released F.2 as G.1 instead, I stuck with it because it would never
be confused with  any official releases.

The following roadmap for future follow-up POS F releases is nothing but
pure speculation, wishful thinking, and blue sky estimates -- and should
in NO way  be construed  as a promise  to implement anything.  That said,
these are some of the ideas and loose plans for further enhancements and
continued development of this POS branch,  to continue support for older
PERQ-1s that are limited to POS F (old Z80) or the 4K CPU.


5.1.  Release F.16

    Drawing library module and ongoing code cleanup
    Diagnostics and additional packages


5.2.  Release F.18

    Shell command-line history and editing
    Documentation cleanup and better on-line help
    Updated utility programs (more consistent command-line parsing)
    Package management?


5.3.  Release F.22

    Support for extended hardware/emulation features:
        Shugart 48MB (SA4104) disk?
        Landscape display, better Ethernet support?


5.4.  Release F.35

    POS G integration?  (QCode V4)
    PERQ-2, EIO, multiple disks, MPOS?
    Profits!!!



                                - 14 -


